README.md, before:

# async-exception-semantics
A case study on exception visibility gaps in Python async systems
Silent Failures: Exception Semantics in Asynchronous Transaction Systems

This repository documents a real failure mode observed in high-throughput
asynchronous transaction systems using Python's asyncio runtime.

The case study examines how exceptions raised in fire-and-forget async tasks
can become invisible to the spawning context, leading to violations of
system-level correctness invariants in production systems.

## Overview

- Domain: Distributed systems, async runtimes, system reliability
- Language: Python (asyncio)
- Focus: Semantic gap between developer mental models and runtime guarantees

## Contents

- `reproduction.py` — Minimal, deterministic reproduction of the failure
- `case-study.md` — Technical analysis and system-level implications
- `notes.md` — References to Python documentation and PEPs

## Why This Matters

This is not a bug in application code.
It is a consequence of underspecified exception observability semantics
in asynchronous runtimes.

The failure mode:
- Passes code review
- Survives integration testing
- Manifests only under production concurrency patterns

## Status

This repository is intentionally minimal.
It is designed for clarity and reproducibility, not popularity.

## Observed Behavior

When running the reproduction script:

```bash
The system reports all transactions as confirmed:

User confirmations: 50
However, the event loop logs multiple validation failures:

EVENT LOOP CAUGHT: ValueError('Transaction 0 exceeds limit')
EVENT LOOP CAUGHT: ValueError('Transaction 5 exceeds limit')
EVENT LOOP CAUGHT: ValueError('Transaction 10 exceeds limit')
...
These exceptions are visible to the event loop but never propagate to the caller that confirmed the transactions. The system’s control flow remains unaware of the failures.

Commit message:

Enhance README with new sections on exceptions
Added sections on the importance of exception semantics and the scope of the case study.

README.md, after:

# async-exception-semantics
A case study on exception visibility gaps in Python async systems
Silent Failures: Exception Semantics in Asynchronous Transaction Systems

This repository documents a real failure mode observed in high-throughput
asynchronous transaction systems using Python's asyncio runtime.

The case study examines how exceptions raised in fire-and-forget async tasks
can become invisible to the spawning context, leading to violations of
system-level correctness invariants in production systems.

## Why this matters

This repository documents a class of failure modes where asynchronous
exception semantics violate system-level correctness invariants.
The issue is not incorrect code, but a mismatch between developer mental
models and the guarantees provided by async runtimes.

In production systems, these semantic gaps can lead to silent data loss,
financial inconsistencies, and delayed detection of critical failures.

## Overview

- Domain: Distributed systems, async runtimes, system reliability
- Language: Python (asyncio)
- Focus: Semantic gap between developer mental models and runtime guarantees

## Contents

- `reproduction.py` — Minimal, deterministic reproduction of the failure
- `case-study.md` — Technical analysis and system-level implications
- `notes.md` — References to Python documentation and PEPs

## Why This Matters

This is not a bug in application code.
It is a consequence of underspecified exception observability semantics
in asynchronous runtimes.

The failure mode:
- Passes code review
- Survives integration testing
- Manifests only under production concurrency patterns

## Status

This repository is intentionally minimal.
It is designed for clarity and reproducibility, not popularity.

### Scope

This is not a proposal to change Python or asyncio.
It is a case study demonstrating how underspecified exception visibility
can produce silent failures in high-throughput systems.

## Observed Behavior

When running the reproduction script:

```bash
The system reports all transactions as confirmed:

User confirmations: 50
However, the event loop logs multiple validation failures:

EVENT LOOP CAUGHT: ValueError('Transaction 0 exceeds limit')
EVENT LOOP CAUGHT: ValueError('Transaction 5 exceeds limit')
EVENT LOOP CAUGHT: ValueError('Transaction 10 exceeds limit')
...
These exceptions are visible to the event loop but never propagate to the caller that confirmed the transactions. The system’s control flow remains unaware of the failures.
